GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Presidential candidates
descend on South Carolina and
Nevada before
voting this weekend. We get the
latest from
the trail.
Also ahead: growing
anti-Semitism in Denmark
and Sweden, where Jewish
families are increasingly
under attack.
And how slow Internet speeds
slow learning
for Mississippi high school
students.
PAM ODOM, Teacher: There's a
large portion
of them that have never been out
of a 60-mile
radius of this town. And if our
technology
is slow, I can't expose them to
anything.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: President Obama
vowed today to
nominate someone -- quote --
"indisputably
qualified" to replace the late
Supreme Court
Justice Antonin Scalia.
Senate Republicans are insisting
he forego
a nomination fight in this
election year.
But after a Southeast Asian
summit in California,
Mr. Obama said he intends to do
his job, and
senators should do theirs.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
There are a lot of Republican
senators who
are going to be under a lot of
pressure from
various special interests and
various constituencies
and many of their voters to not
let any nominee
go through, no matter who I
nominate.
But that's not how the system's
supposed to
work. That's not how our
democracy is supposed
to work.
GWEN IFILL: Separately, court
officials announced
Justice Scalia will lie in
repose in the court's
Great Hall on Friday. The
funeral will be
Saturday.
From the Gulf Coast to New
England, a winter
storm system whipped up trouble
overnight.
Millions along the Eastern
Seaboard faced
a treacherous morning commute,
after freezing
rain coated roads with ice. The
same front
sent tornadoes ripping through
parts of the
Gulf Coast late Monday, damaging
homes in
the Florida Panhandle and
Mississippi. But
in the West, California and
Arizona faced
another day of record heat.
The U.S. and Cuba signed a deal
today to resume
commercial air traffic for the
first time
in 50 years. It's the latest
step in normalizing
relations. As early as this
fall, American
carriers could offer 110 flights
a day between
the U.S. and Cuba.
In Mexico, Pope Francis urged
clergy to battle
the drug violence that's
devastated the country.
He took that message to Morelia,
capital of
a southwestern state ravaged by
decades of
gang warfare. Speaking to a
packed stadium,
Francis exhorted priests and
nuns not to give
in to moral paralysis, what he
called the
devil's favorite weapon.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through
translator): What temptation can
come to us
from places often dominated by
violence, corruption
and drug trafficking in the face
of suffering
and vulnerability? What
temptation might we
suffer over and over again when
faced with
this reality? I think we can sum
it up in
one word: resignation.
GWEN IFILL: This was the
second-to-last day
of the pontiff's Mexico tour.
Tomorrow, he
visits prison inmates near the
Texas border.
The U.N.'s Human Rights Office
sharply criticized
China today for an ongoing
crackdown on dissent.
It urged Beijing to release more
than 250
human rights lawyers and
activists arrested
since July. The office also
pointed to the
disappearance of five Hong Kong
publishers
who opposed the Chinese
government.
Four U.S. journalists arrested
in Bahrain
have been released. They were
detained Sunday,
covering the anniversary of the
2011 Shiite
uprising. Today, the Americans
were formally
charged with joining an illegal
gathering.
Later, they flew out of the
island nation,
after the U.S. Embassy
intervened.
Heavy fighting in Northwestern
Syria clouded
prospects for a temporary truce
today. Government
forces and allied groups backed
by Russian
airstrikes kept pounding away
near the nation's
largest city.
Alex Thomson of Independent
Television News
filed this report, including
some images that
may be disturbing.
ALEX THOMSON: The suburbs of
northern Aleppo,
cluster bombs from aircraft. The
closer we
get to any proposed cease-fire
on Friday,
the less likely it looks.
Across the battlefield, the
Russia-Syrian-Iranian
forces have never had it so
good. Why talk
peace when maybe, just maybe,
you can wrap
up the entire war?
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, President of
Syria (through
translator): They say they want
a cease-fire
within a week. Well, who is able
to assemble
all these conditions or
requirements within
a week? No one. Who will talk to
the terrorists
if the terrorist organizations
refuse a cease-fire?
Who will hold them accountable?
ALEX THOMSON: No wonder Assad
talks war, because
across Northern Syria, from Homs
to the country's
most populous city, Aleppo, the
Syrian army,
with Russian air support and
Iranian-backed
militias, wants to surround and
take all of
Aleppo whilst moving north to
seal off the
border to Turkey to cut rebel
support lines.
Rebel fighters in Aleppo, but
for how much
longer? Down in Damascus, the
U.N. talked
today about getting humanitarian
aid into
some areas tomorrow. Well, they
talked about
it. Aleppo is unlikely to see it
happening.
Today, they dug a baby alive
from his obliterated
family home there. Then they
found his elder
brother, also somehow still
living.
GWEN IFILL: Amid the fighting,
Syrian Kurds
advanced near the Turkish
border. But fearing
they plan to seize Turkish
territory as well,
Turkey shelled the Kurdish
fighters.
An Egyptian diplomat who rose to
U.N. secretary-general
died today. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali served as
the world body's first chief
from Africa from
1992 to 1996. His term was
marked by tension
with the U.S. and then-President
Bill Clinton,
as well as criticism of the U.N.
response
to genocides in Rwanda and
Bosnia. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali was 93 years old.
Four major oil producers pledged
today to
cap production, in a bid to
support prices.
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela
and Qatar
said they'd limit output for the
year to the
levels of last month if other
countries follow
suit. It's unclear if Iran will
agree. The
Islamic republic wants to ramp
up oil exports
now that sanctions have eased.
Wall Street rallied for a second
day. The
Dow Jones industrial average
gained 222 points
to close near 16200. The Nasdaq
rose 98 points,
and the S&P 500 added 30.
And the music world has doled
out bragging
rights for another year.
California rapper
Kendrick Lamar took home five
Grammys last
night in Los Angeles, the
evening's biggest
haul. Pop superstar Taylor Swift
won for album
of the year. And " Hamilton"
Playwright Lin-Manuel
Miranda accepted the Grammy for
best musical
theater album.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
candidates
feeling the pressure bring the
heat four days
before the next primary; a push
for convenience
stores to provide healthier food
options;
refugees and the rise of
anti-Semitism in
Europe; the Jon Stewart of
Egypt; and much
more.
The candidates who would be
president are
targeting two groups of
potential voters today,
Democrat and Republican, in
South Carolina.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm the conservative that is
going to be rebuild
the U.S. military.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republicans
fighting for
South Carolina have learned fast
the people
of the Palmetto State like to
talk security.
In Columbia, former Florida
Governor Jeb Bush's
latest swing at Donald Trump was
about readiness
to command.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: I guess
he think he can use his real
estate skills
to somehow magically bring to
life the weapons
system necessary to keep our war
fighters
safe, that magically we will
have an army
of 490,000, that magically we
will find 15,000
more Marines.
LISA DESJARDINS: For the moment,
South Carolina
is the GOP front line, with
candidates in
13 different cities today, that
across a state
with a huge veterans population
and more than
half-a-dozen military bases.
As for front-runner Donald
Trump, he called
up an Iraq War veteran to the
stage in North
Augusta today. Trump has been
blasting Bush's
brother, former President George
W. Bush,
for the war and for 9/11, and he
did it again
last night.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Ever ask yourself why his
brother went silent
for all these years? No, don't
ask yourself
that.
LISA DESJARDINS: And count Ted
Cruz in on
the security talk, calling for a
larger active-duty
military.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
The nation must be prepared for
the possibility
of multiple near-simultaneous
conflicts, instead
of the force that is, according
to the previous
secretary of the Army, teetering
on the ragged
edge of military readiness.
LISA DESJARDINS: A few miles
away in Summerville,
Marco Rubio was more relaxed.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: The mosquito's
the state
bird?
(LAUGHTER)
LISA DESJARDINS: The Florida
senator put a
new twist on the Obama attack
that tripped
him up in the past.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Barack Obama,
at the risk
of repeating myself, knows
exactly what he's
doing. Was Obamacare an accident
or on purpose?
AUDIENCE: On purpose.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Was Dodd-Frank
an accident
or on purpose?
AUDIENCE: On purpose.
LISA DESJARDINS: Democrats
today? A different
theme. In Columbia, Bernie
Sanders made his
case to black voters, who form a
majority
of the state's Democrats.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Change takes place from the
bottom on up when
people begin to stir.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Dr. King
was clearly
one of the great leaders in
American history.
But it wasn't him alone. It was
thousands
and thousands of
African-Americans and their
white allies.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hillary Clinton
too was courting
black voters, but in New York.
She sat down
with leaders of the National
Urban League.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
My campaign really is about
breaking every
barrier, because I believe
absolutely that
America can't live up to its
potential unless
every single person has the
chance to live
up to theirs.
LISA DESJARDINS: Notably,
neither of the Democrats
made a stop today in Nevada,
even though that's
where their next contest will
be, this Saturday.
It's the same day that
Republicans vote in
South Carolina.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: The official
unemployment rate
may have just fallen to under 5
percent, but
food stamps remain a pivotal
part of daily
life for millions of Americans;
46 million
people, or about one of every
seven Americans,
receive food stamps.
Now the government wants to
steer them toward
healthier food choices. The USDA
plans to
require retailers who accept
food stamps to
stock more fresh fruits,
vegetables, meat,
poultry and fish. The stores
would have to
stock at least 168 items the
government considers
healthy.
But would healthier options
necessarily change
behavior?
We explore this with Yael
Lehmann, executive
director of The Food Trust in
Philadelphia,
a not-for-profit organization
that works to
ensure healthier eating
alternatives.
Welcome, Ms. Lehmann.
So, why -- what is the reasoning
behind forcing
retailers to stock healthier
foods?
YAEL LEHMANN, Executive
Director, The Food
Trust: Well, I think the USDA
has good intentions
here and it's a good goal,
right? We want
all people, including low-income
people who
are on SNAP, or formally called
food stamps,
to have access to affordable and
nutritious
foods.
We want to make sure oranges are
just as accessible
to them as orange soda, for
example, when
they go to the convenience
store. But we want
to make sure -- we also want to
make sure
that we're supporting the
retailers in this
case, so that they learn how to
stock these
items. And we know it can be
possible. It
can be done. We just want to
make sure it's
done in a way that there is no
unintended
harmful consequences to the
retailer or to
the customer.
GWEN IFILL: So, when you say
stock these items,
do these retailers get a list of
the kinds
of items or the specific items
they should
have in stock at all times?
YAEL LEHMANN: That's my
understanding, is
that USDA would offer a list.
This is a -- again, this is a
proposed policy
change, and I think that, over
our many years,
we have worked for over 10 years
now to help
folks who run convenience stores
to stock
healthier items. We know it can
be done, but
that they need assistance, they
need training
in some cases.
In some cases, they're not
familiar with stocking
certain items like produce. So,
yes, if we
give them a list, let's make
sure that we
can help them be successful and
be able to
pick the items on that list that
are going
to sell and are going to be
popular with their
customers.
GWEN IFILL: As a business
proposition, is
this something that's
sustainable for the
corner grocery store, the corner
bodega, which
may not even have the storage
space or the
refrigeration for those kinds of
items?
YAEL LEHMANN: It's true there
are certain
challenges, and that's another
thing that
we want to think about when
we're considering
this proposed change that USDA
has put out
there.
Some of the retailers don't have
refrigeration
or they don't have the place to
stock these
certain items. At The Food
Trust, the organization
that I'm the executive director
of, we work
with the retailers to help them
find refrigerators
and to show them how to stock
these foods.
We want to make sure, again,
that they have
the proper ways to stock these
items and to
make them look attractive and to
be stored
correctly, you know, so that --
and priced
correctly, so that it's as
accessible and
affordable as possible and
attractive as possible
to their customers, so that they
can be successful.
And we know it can be done. We
have seen retailers
over the years do very well with
this, but
they need some help out of the
gate.
GWEN IFILL: Well, so the onus is
put on the
retailer.
What about the behavior of the
consumer? How
do you know that just merely
putting the oranges
on the shelf won't make the
person who's buying
with food stamps reach for
orange soda if
the food stamps will cover it?
What changes
the behavior?
YAEL LEHMANN: Well, I think
there's a number
of things. You know, we can talk
to -- there
is people who are more educated
on this than
I am, but when it -- as you
know, when you
walk into any store, whether
it's a grocery
store or a corner store, the way
that items
are placed, if it looks
attractive, if it's
priced the right way, if it's in
the eye level,
all of these different things
can make an
impact on what you choose.
We also know that even -- that
by having marketing
materials or sometimes even by
having the
retailer behind the counter, the
guy saying
behind the counter, hey, have
you tried the
oranges, can even have an
impact.
There's lots of different ways
that you can
influence consumer buying
habits. But, for
the most part, you want to make
sure it's
priced right, it looks good, it
tastes good,
and that you can see it, it's
right there
in front of you.
GWEN IFILL: But what if what you
see in front
of you is pre-packaged noodles,
freeze-dried
food, and right next to it is
perhaps the
more expensive fresh noodles?
What about this,
especially since you're still
trying to stretch
your food stamp buck, will
encourage you to
buy the fresher stuff, if it's
cheaper, if
you get more with your food
stamps?
YAEL LEHMANN: No, it's a very
good point you're
bringing up.
Price is incredibly important,
especially
when you're on a very, very
tight budget.
And price is going to matter
when you're making
your decisions of what you're
going to buy
when you're in the store,
whether it's the
convenience store or the grocery
store.
There is where it's critical to
have other
programs. There's incentive
programs, for
example, different programs that
are called
things like Double Up Food
Bucks, for example,
that are advocated by groups
like Wholesome
Wave and Fair Food Network and
The Food Trust
and others.
But it's a way that you can
stretch your food
stamp dollars, so that when you
are buying
that healthy item, it's at an
even better
price point. So, we do want to
think about
how can we make sure that the
prices are good,
what additional incentives can
we offer to
the customer to make sure that
the fresh noodle
is priced the same as the
processed, maybe
not as healthy noodle.
GWEN IFILL: Yael Lehmann,
executive director
of The Food Trust in
Philadelphia, thank you
very much.
YAEL LEHMANN: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: A surge in
anti-Semitic attacks
is driving European Jews to move
to Israel
and other countries where they
feel safe.
Over the last two years, nearly
20,000 Jews
have left Europe, according to
the Jewish
Agency, a group that tracks
immigration to
Israel.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports
tonight from Denmark and Sweden
on the fears
there, and the attempts to
reduce the tension.
MALCOLM BRABANT: These
Valentine's bouquets
symbolize the loss of Denmark's
innocence.
Prime Minister Lars Lokke
Rasmussen made an
anniversary pledge to filmmaker
Finn Norgaard,
shot at a free speech forum, and
synagogue
security guard Dan Uzan, killed
for being
a Jew.
LARS LOKKE RASMUSSEN, Danish
Prime Minister:
Of course, we are still
threatened, but we
insist on living our peaceful
life. And that
is perhaps the most important
message we can
send here today, that we will
never -- we
will never give in. We will
never give up.
MALCOLM BRABANT: What about for
the Jewish
community as well, because they
feel particularly
vulnerable?
LARS LOKKE RASMUSSEN: Yes, I
realize that.
And for that reason, we are in
close cooperation
with the Jewish community and
will do our
utmost to protect them. We
insist to live
side by side in a peaceful
manner.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Denmark's new
reality required
heavily armed police at a
basketball match
to celebrate Dan Uzan's life. He
loved the
game and his face adorned the
uniforms of
the predominantly Jewish teams.
Dan's father,
Sergeot, has always insisted
that hate shouldn't
prevail.
SERGEOT UZAN, Father of Dan
Uzan: The most
important message is that we
have to be together
and to fight terrorism together.
Evil will
not win and with power. We have
to win it
with goodness.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Hannah Bentow
was the girl
Dan Uzan died protecting. Her
bar mitzvah,
or coming of age party, was in
full swing
when the terrorists attacked the
synagogue.
Every week, before the Jewish
Sabbath, her
mother, Mette, has a special
ritual, lighting
a candle for Dan Uzan. Mette
Bentow's high
profile has made her a target
for anti-Semitic
behavior. Since the shooting,
she's received
numerous threats via social
media, and in
broad daylight in central
Copenhagen.
METTE MIRIAM BENTOW, Mother: He
spat at me.
So, I did get a little yelling,
but it was
mainly the spitting at me that
was very uncomfortable.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Mette Bentow
believes that,
these days, anti-Semitism comes
predominantly
from Muslims. But she's trying
to maintain
a sense of idealism and
friendship with Niddal
El Jabri.
El Jabri, a Palestinian whose
family hails
from Hebron on the West Bank,
was instrumental
in organizing a peace ring
around the synagogue
following last year's attack.
NIDDAL EL JABRI, Palestinian:
It's all about
the kids for me and it's always
been about
the kids for me. We want to make
this society
safe for them. I keep saying
that the Jewish
school here in Copenhagen is one
of the biggest
examples of how humanity has
failed in this
country, that you have to have
armed forces,
you have barbed wire around the
school, you
have cameras all over.
When that is the situation,
adults need to
sit down and really think about
what this
country is doing to its
children.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Mette Bentow
could not bear
to be in Denmark on the
anniversary. She took
her daughter to Israel, to which
she's increasingly
drawn.
METTE MIRIAM BENTOW: My
children's future
is not in Denmark. No, it's not.
If they want
to live a Jewish life, it's not
in Denmark.
No. My future for the time being
is in Denmark,
and then we will see.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Historically in
Europe, anti-Semitism
has come from the right wing,
but most Jewish
leaders believe the greatest
threat now emanates
from the continent's growing
Muslim population.
This is a gathering of the
extreme Islamist
political party Hizb ut Tahrir
last year,
not long after the Copenhagen
attacks.
Hizb ut Tahrir wants a worldwide
caliphate.
It's banned in several European
countries,
but not in Denmark. Its
spokesman is Elias
Lamrabet.
What is your message to the Jews
of Copenhagen
who feel especially vulnerable?
ELIAS LAMRABET, Hizb Trump
Tahrir: I don't
feel responsible to have a
specific message
to the Jews of Copenhagen. And
I'm not certainly
that they in fact are especially
vulnerable
compared to many other people.
So, I don't
really have any comment to that
question.
MALCOLM BRABANT: How can you say
they are
not vulnerable when...
ELIAS LAMRABET: I said I don't
have a comment
to that question.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Is that because
it's too
difficult for you?
ELIAS LAMRABET: No, not at all.
It's because
I think this interview is over.
MALCOLM BRABANT: After the
synagogue attack,
Copenhagen's chief rabbi, Jair
Melchior, says
that dialogue with local Muslim
leaders has
intensified and improved, and
claims that
Denmark is safer for Jews than
France, where
thousands are leaving.
RABBI JAIR MELCHIOR, Copenhagen:
The majority
of the Jews leaving France, they
leave from
very specific neighborhoods.
They are usually
Jews who emigrated, or their
parents emigrated
to France. They emigrated to
live in a better
place.
Now, if they live in a bad
neighborhood with
a very big percentage of Muslim
population,
then they can find themselves --
leave.
MALCOLM BRABANT: After a machete
attack on
a Jewish teacher last year in
the southern
French port of Marseille, the
city's chief
rabbi urged his community not to
go out in
public wearing Jewish symbols
such as the
kippa. He was quickly criticized
for what
was called his defeatist
attitude.
But here in Scandinavia, such
discretion has
become essential, across the
bridge to Malmo,
whose large Muslim population
has expanded
drastically during Sweden's
short-lived open-door
refugee policy. At the Jewish
kindergarten,
they're preparing traditional
Sabbath bread.
The numbers of children
attending have dropped
sharply since the Copenhagen
attacks. We weren't
allowed to show their faces for
security reasons.
Today, the Jewish community
numbers just 500,
a quarter of its size a
generation ago. Its
acting head is Freddy Gellberg.
FREDDY GELLBERG, Jewish
Confederation: It's
essential for the Jewish
community in this
city. If we don't have any kids,
no future.
Our, what should I as you know,
biggest enemy
is assimilation, in a way,
traditions and
culture, which are most
important for most
of us, maybe not the Jewish
religion.
FREDRIK SIERADZKI, Jewish
Information Center:
Why can't we dress the way we
want to dress
without risking being attacked?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Fredrik
Sieradzki is running
a new information center that's
part of a
rear-guard action to give this
ever-shrinking
minority a more powerful voice.
FREDRIK SIERADZKI: Most Jews are
wary about
wearing symbols, Jewish symbols,
of course.
Young Jewish kids are very -- I
know, are
very careful not to walk around
with Star
of David or other kind of -- or
a yarmulke
on their head, a kippa.
MALCOLM BRABANT: If anyone
understands the
situation, it's Siavosh
Derakhti, who's been
feted by President Obama for
urging Muslims
to resist anti-Semitism and to
integrate.
A young Swede of Iranian Muslim
heritage,
his peacemaking efforts have put
him on the
same front line as the Jews.
SIAVOSH DERAKHTI, Activist:
Every day, I get
the threats that I'm a traitor,
I'm a Jewish
lover, I'm a pig, I have to die,
they're going
to kill me.
I'm here in Sweden because my
family flew
from Iran and from the
dictatorship. What
we see in Malmo in Sweden, that
this democracy,
that we cannot live side by
side. And I want
to make that happen.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Nima Gholam Ali
Pour's parents
fled from Iran in 1988 to avoid
his brother
being conscripted as a child
soldier. He belongs
to the right-wing Sweden
Democrat Party and
fears anti-Semitism will
increase as a result
of the country's open-door
policy.
NIMA GHOLAM ALI POUR, Political
Scientist:
My worry is that if you see the
infrastructure
among some migrants here in
Sweden, if you
see the mosques, what they are
saying, what
kind of language they are using,
and if you
see the language that today
exists, the migrants
that are coming, they are coming
to a society
where anti-Semitism is normal
among some migrants,
and it will strengthen.
FREDRIK SIERADZKI: We hope that
the influx
of new -- of immigrants here,
refugees, immigrants,
won't increase the tensions. And
we try to
work together with the city
council and with
other organizations, immigrant
organizations,
to bring down the tension.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Jewish
communities believe
that, if these children are to
have a future,
newcomers must leave behind the
conflicts
of the Middle East and accept
the European
aspirations of tolerance and
peaceful coexistence.
But critics say that Sweden has
a poor integration
record. So, is that an
impossible challenge?
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Scandinavia.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
schools with
the slowest Internet in
Mississippi; how the
Black Panthers sparked a
revolution that continues
today; and why a chef says you
should never
pass up dessert.
But, first, last week marked
five years since
longtime Egyptian President
Hosni Mubarak
was removed from power after the
so-called
18 days of revolution.
But the path forward has been
tumultuous.
Our coverage of these 5 Years On
concludes
with a conversation with a man
who's often
called the Jon Stewart of Egypt.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
JEFFREY BROWN: As revolution
swept through
Egypt in 2011, Bassem Youssef
and several
friends started a political
satire show on
YouTube broadcast from his
laundry room.
Nine episodes and five million
views later,
Youssef was offered a weekly
show on an Egyptian
television network. With his
caustic wit and
ironic takedowns, he lampooned
the successive
government of the Muslim
Brotherhood's Mohammed
Morsi and the military's Abdel
Fattah El-Sisi.
Honors and trouble followed. In
2013, he recognized
as one of "TIME" magazine's 100
most influential
people and received a Press
Freedom Award
by the Committee to Protect
Journalists. But
that same year, he was
investigated and interrogated
by the Morsi government on
charges of insulting
the president.
The military government that
deposed Morsi
in a coup was no more friendlier
to Youssef's
brand of political humor. His
show was canceled
in 2014 and he left Egypt.
Youssef now lives in Dubai. I
reached him
on a recent visit to this
country. And when
I asked him how he would
describe the political
situation in Egypt today, he
began in full
satirical mode.
BASSEM YOUSSEF, Egyptian
Humorist: Oh, it's
perfect. It's so democratic. We
absolutely
have no problem. Political
satire shows like
mine are still going on, on the
air. There
is absolutely no crackdown on
freedom of speech.
Everything is lovey-dovey and
it's beautiful.
JEFFREY BROWN: And everything
you just said
is completely untrue, right?
BASSEM YOUSSEF: I -- your words,
not mine.
Everything is -- it's perfect.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, five years
later, do you
think that people wonder -- do
you yourself
wonder what happened or even
whether it was
all worth it?
BASSEM YOUSSEF: Well, here's the
thing.
I think, in a day and age of
instant gratification
and instant retweets and shares
and likes,
people think that things come
easily. But
they don't. If you look at
revolutions and
change all over history and
other parts of
the world, change didn't come in
18 days,
which we are -- we and the rest
of the world
was basically naive, think that
we can actually
get rid of a dictatorship in 18
days.
A revolution is not an event.
It's a process.
And it takes its time.
JEFFREY BROWN: In your own work,
you came
up against two very powerful
forces in Egyptian
life, right, religion and the
military.
BASSEM YOUSSEF: Well, religion
and nationalism
is basically flip sides of the
same coin.
These are stuff that are always
used in order
to push back on the dissent and
opposition
and criticism. And I was accused
during the
Muslim Brotherhood of being an
infidel, of
someone who doesn't like Islam,
or who have
some sort of a -- I want to
insult religion.
And, afterwards, I was accused
of insulting
the army, insulting the
military.
And these are the stuff that is
extremely
sensitive. And people wouldn't
even go into
a discussion of what I actually
said and they
would assume that I actually
meant to insult
religion or insult the army.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you were
hugely popular.
You were reaching a lot of
people. Yet you
still felt you had to stop and
leave the country,
out of fear for yourself and
your family?
BASSEM YOUSSEF: Well, at the end
of the day,
when you have -- you need a
window.
And that window or the windows,
broadcast
channels and networks, at the
end of the day,
they are also under a lot of
pressure. And
you could continue -- you cannot
continue
with the pressure being
overwhelming on everybody.
That's why I chose -- I opted
for the choice
of safety for me and my family
and people
around me, because even --
sometimes, they
don't even come and touch you.
They -- some
other people that will be hurt
because of
what you say. People are not
even related
to the show, but, like, related
to you. So,
I need to think on the bigger
picture.
JEFFREY BROWN: Looking back,
what role did
satire play, and what role might
it still
play in Egypt?
BASSEM YOUSSEF: Well, satire
will continue
to exist after the show.
I didn't invent satire. I didn't
come up with
it. And it will continue to be a
very powerful
tool to disrupt political taboos
and social
taboos and religious taboos,
because those
taboos are always used to
control and to curb
people's way of creativity and
thinking, by
making them feel guilty because
they want
to make a change.
Satire liberates you from all of
these restrictions.
And it's still used by young
people on the
Internet and online. And it will
not stop.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about the
limits of satire?
Have you come to think that
people perhaps
expect too much of it and its
ability to effect
change?
BASSEM YOUSSEF: Yes.
I think it's true in all parts
of the world,
but, at the end of the day, a
satirist or
a comedian only has his voice.
We just bring
it up to the people for
discussion. And if
people don't make a change, you
cannot continue
to operate in a vacuum.
It is -- and so that's why
people have this
sort of slacktivism, not
activism even. They're
just, like, protected by a --
behind their
keyboards and by their screens.
And they think
that, like, laughing at
something will solve
things.
They need to move and do the
change themselves.
At the end of the day, a
satirist or a comedian
has a very, very limited role.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you, is it
still possible
to live and work in Egypt now?
BASSEM YOUSSEF: I am not there
right now.
And that is my answer.
JEFFREY BROWN: Bassem Youssef,
thank you so
much.
BASSEM YOUSSEF: Thank you very
GWEN IFILL: Now to the digital
divide in public
education.
Nearly 10 percent of all
students attend rural
schools, where the simple act of
going online
can hamper their ability to
learn.
Education Week, which partners
with the "NewsHour,"
visited schools in Mississippi
with the slowest
Internet in the state.
Special correspondent John
Tulenko reports
on the problem, and what's being
done to fix
it, part of our weekly education
coverage
we call Making the Grade.
JOHN TULENKO: Calhoun County in
Northeast
Mississippi covers nearly 600
care miles,
most of it farmland dotted by a
few small
downs like Vardaman.
C.J. WEDDLE, Student: Vardaman
is about as
small-town country as it gets.
And everybody
knows everybody. And most
everybody is kin
to everybody.
JOHN TULENKO: This is sweet
potato country,
home to 17-year-old Clemi Jean
(ph) Weddle,
who goes by C.J.
C.J. WEDDLE: If you count the
work I have
put in this summer, I would be a
fifth-generation
sweet potato farmer.
JOHN TULENKO: C.J. is doing well
in high school
and she's planning ahead.
C.J. WEDDLE: I see myself
graduating from
a four-year college and a degree
I want where
I can have multiple job
opportunities and
not be confined to one.
JOHN TULENKO: But standing
between C.J. and
her college dreams is a major
problem, the
Internet at her school.
C.J. WEDDLE: The Internet is
very contrary
at Vardaman High School. You
have good, you
have bad days, but at Vardaman,
you have more
bad than good.
JOHN TULENKO: Schools here have
the slowest
Internet service in all of
Mississippi.
C.J. WEDDLE: History classes are
limited to
books and worksheets. Well, you
don't do research
on significant figures in
history or significant
figures the government now, and
that -- I
think that's really going to
hurt us later.
You know, why be limited to
that, when there's
a whole world at your fingertips
or potentially
could be?
JOHN TULENKO: The Internet here
is slow because
it comes via old copper wires
running for
miles underground. Even though
high-speed
cables have been laid by a phone
company on
one side of the district, on the
other side,
a second company has said
upgrading its service
is too expensive.
Without those new cables, there
is no high-speed
Internet for schools and
students like Pam
Odom's sixth graders.
PAM ODOM, Teacher: These are
rural children.
Most of them have never been
outside Mississippi.
There's a large portion of them
that have
never been out of a 60-mile
radius of this
town. And if our technology is
slow, I can't
expose them to anything.
JOHN TULENKO: Meanwhile, the
rest of the state
is racing ahead.
AMANDA REISER, Teacher: Make
sure you have
all that copied down.
JOHN TULENKO: Amanda Reiser
teaches sixth
grade in Oxford, Mississippi, a
more affluent
college town just 30 minutes
away.
How hard is it for you to go
online?
AMANDA REISER: It's not hard at
all. They
can get online and do research
anytime throughout
the day really with any teacher
has a cart
or a computer is available.
JOHN TULENKO: And that's just
the start.
AMANDA REISER: Our curriculum is
100 percent
online, so quizzes, homework and
tests are
all completed online. We can add
enrichment
lessons or we can have an
intervention lesson
or we can add more practice on a
certain topic
or a certain lesson and kind of
make sure
they understand those
fundamental basics before
we move on.
JOHN TULENKO: Looking around, it
suddenly
hit us. Something was missing.
Do you have any books in this
room?
AMANDA REISER: I do have some
books, six books
available.
JOHN TULENKO: Where?
AMANDA REISER: They're hidden
behind the beautiful
curtains.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN TULENKO: Back in Calhoun
County, they're
still using textbooks every day.
And while computers and Internet
access are
no guarantee of a better
education, without
them, students are at an unfair
disadvantage.
It's a problem in rural
districts across the
country. Some 20 percent
currently lack access
to high-speed fiber.
But help could come from new
changes to the
$4 billion federal E-Rate
program, which helps
schools pay for Internet
service.
TOM WHEELER, Chairman, Federal
Communications
Commission: What we did was, we
said, OK,
schools, if you're not being
provided service
or not being provided service at
a reasonable
rate by your local provider, you
can build
it yourself.
JOHN TULENKO: Tom Wheeler, who
heads the Federal
Communications Commission, led
an effort to
overhaul the E-Rate program, in
part by giving
districts like Calhoun County
the option to
use federal funds to build fiber
networks
of their own, pressuring local
telecoms to
offer better deals.
TOM WHEELER: School
administrators say, I'm
not going to put up with it
anymore, that
I'm being told it's too
expensive, or I'm
being told it can't be built.
But you actually
can take the situation, and the
SEC will help
you take that situation in your
hand by funding
it, that's a game-changer.
JOHN TULENKO: Recently, Calhoun
County became
the test case, one of the first
districts
to seek federal funds to build a
new fiber
network that included the option
of a build-out
of its own.
Mike Moore is superintendent of
schools.
MIKE MOORE, Superintendent,
Calhoun County
Schools: All of these providers
and all start
popping up and saying, well,
maybe we can
do this, and maybe we can do
that. But I don't
think -- until we talked about
really building
our own line and putting the
bids out, I don't
really think they were serious.
JOHN TULENKO: As it has turned
out, schools
here won't have to build their
own network.
By inviting outside companies to
bid on the
job or come in with their own
fiber, the district
was able to secure a more
attractive contract
from its local providers to
complete the job.
But it will take some time,
maybe a year,
hopefully not too late for C.J.
Weddle, who
will be a senior.
C.J. WEDDLE: I'm a very
competitive person.
I'm not a sore loser, but I
don't like to
lose.
JOHN TULENKO: No one said fixing
this problem
was going to be easy.
In Calhoun County, Mississippi,
I'm John Tulenko
of Education Week, reporting for
the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: The Education Week
team has extensive
coverage about broadband in
rural schools
at EdWeek.org.
Online, you can also watch our
recent story
on how one of the poorest school
districts
in the country grappled with
similar problems
and decided to outfit its school
buses with
Wi-Fi. You can find that on our
Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
The "Independent Lens"
documentary "The Black
Panthers: Vanguard of the
Revolution," airs
tonight on PBS stations. It
traces the group's
origins and influence on U.S.
politics and
culture in the 1960s
MAN: Black Panthers were
absolutely unique.
MAN: Police jump on you, beat
you up. This
is what we were going through on
a daily basis.
MAN: Now we had voices that were
not going
to turn the other cheek.
MAN: Stop brutalizing our
community, or we're
going to drive you pigs out.
MAN: We don't hate those guys
because of their
color. We hate oppression.
MAN: We wanted the entire
community to follow.
GWEN IFILL: Jeffrey Brown is
back with his
conversation with the film's
award-winning
director, Stanley Nelson.
JEFFREY BROWN: Stanley Nelson,
welcome to
you.
STANLEY NELSON, Director, "The
Black Panthers:
Vanguard of the Revolution":
Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did this begin
for you from
a sense that the Black Panthers
were misunderstood,
not well-remembered, forgotten
altogether?
What's the beginning?
STANLEY NELSON: I think it was
that they were
misunderstood.
I think that the Panthers are
well-remembered,
but I think that people don't
understand who
the Panthers were and don't
understand how
the Panthers were thought of
back then in
the '60s. So, I thought that it
was really
ripe for a new telling.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, given the
controversy
back then to this day, right,
and it's such
a lot of -- there's a lot of
history to get
your arms around. How did you --
how much
did you think you could tell?
STANLEY NELSON: You know, I
think it started
out as a three-hour project, and
we realized
that two hours was about the
limit.
But, you know, we knew that we
couldn't tell
every single thing, and we knew
that we had
to stop and start somewhere, so
the film really
begins with the beginning of the
Panthers
in 1966 and goes kind of through
their height,
their heyday, and ends in 1973.
JEFFREY BROWN: And misunderstood
in the sense
that -- which part did you feel
you most needed
to -- I don't know if correct is
the right
word.
STANLEY NELSON: I think the
Panthers are really
interesting because they're both
demonized
and they're mythologized at the
same time.
And I think that both groups get
it wrong.
And I think that, a lot of
times, it's oversimplified,
they were bad or they were
great. And there's
a lot of nuance to the Panthers'
story, and
we wanted to really get that out
in this film.
JEFFREY BROWN: And so you're
showing -- you're
certainly showing the social
programs that
they were involved in, but at
the same time,
of course, it begins with guns,
with young
black men and women in the
streets of Oakland.
STANLEY NELSON: Well, it began
as a way of,
as the Panthers would have put
it, to kind
of defend the community against
the brutality
of the police.
At that point, the Oakland
Police Department
was notoriously brutal. And the
Panthers,
there was a quirk in the law, an
open-carry
law in California that kind of
nobody knew
about it, but it said that you
could carry
a loaded weapon as long as you
carried it
out in the open.
So, the Panthers said, OK, well,
we will police
the police. We will follow the
police and,
as they put it, make sure that
no brutality
occurs when the police stop
somebody.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, I have
a -- we have
a short clip I want to show.
This is a little
-- catching a little bit of the
spirit of
the times. Right? OK. Let's take
a look at
that.
STANLEY NELSON: OK.
WOMAN: This brother here,
myself, all of us
were born with our hair like
this, and we
just wear it like this. The
reason for it,
you might say, is like a new
awareness among
black people that their own
natural appearance,
physical appearance, is
beautiful. Black people
are aware now. They're proud of
it. It's pleasing
to them. Isn't it beautiful? All
right.
(LAUGHTER)
WOMAN: You're talking about
people who were
teenagers 17, 18, 19, 20. That's
the bulk
of the Panthers are teenagers.
So the fact
that we were so young and the
fact that this
hadn't happened before, I'm not
certain that
we recognized how startling it
looked to other
people.
JEFFREY BROWN: How startling it
looked.
I mean, you cannot tell the
story of the Black
Panthers without reminding us of
the feel
of the time, right, through the
music, through
the pictures and all.
STANLEY NELSON: Yes, I think
that that was
really important to us making
the film, is
that you had to understand the
times a little
bit. We had to get you back
there to understand
the Panthers at all, or else it
doesn't make
any sense.
And I think that one of the
things that we
were able to use was music, you
know, the
music of the times, the music
where the songs
are, "Am I Black Enough For You"
or "All Power
to the People." You know, those
-- that was
the music and that kind of sets
a base, I
think, for what comes later in
the film.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, inevitably,
you have to
tell the storm that they cause,
the opposition,
the aggression, notably most of
all from the
FBI and J. Edgar Hoover.
STANLEY NELSON: Yes, I mean, I
think that's
really important.
There was always this idea, you
hear rumors
about the FBI setting out to
destroy the Panthers.
But we were able to obtain FBI
memos and we
used J. Edgar Hoover's own words
where he
says very clearly that -- he
tells his agents,
do anything you can to destroy
the Panthers.
Just don't let it get back that
it's the FBI
doing it. These are memos that
we use in the
film.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, of course,
the personalities
within the party, the
leadership, right, Huey
Newton, Bobby Seale, Eldridge
Cleaver, clashing
almost the get-go.
STANLEY NELSON: Yes, these were
volatile personalities.
And I think we show that. I
think the film
is warts and all. It's kind of a
sober, I
hope, assessment of the Black
Panther Party,
of these personalities that are
clashing,
but also the FBI is setting them
against each
other. They're writing letters,
you know,
pretending to be Huey Newton
writing to Eldridge,
and writing letters that are
supposedly Eldridge
writing to Huey, and kind of
spurring this
conflict on.
JEFFREY BROWN: The times, there
are some things
about that, I look at and it
feels very much
set in your time.
And then, of course, there are
other things,
as you are watching the film,
you can't help
but think not that much has
changed. Right?
STANLEY NELSON: Right. Right.
And I think that is what makes
the film so
relevant. The Panthers started
because of
police brutality. We're dealing
with that
over and over again today. The
Panthers have
a 10-point program where they
call for certain
changes, you know, better
education, better
health care, those kind of
things. You know,
we're still fighting for those
in the African-American
community.
So, I think there is this
resonance, you know
to, what's happening today. And
that's what
makes the story in some ways
really important,
you know, because it's not -- it
doesn't exist
only in this historical bubble.
It's not this
thing that you can say, oh, that
was interesting
back then. But it has real
relevance to what's
happening today. And I think
that's what we
wanted the film to talk about
and to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask just
you, finally,
about yourself, thinking about
this film in
the context of all the films you
have made.
And I have seen many of them.
So, is it -- do you see it as a
kind of continuation
of a mission that you're on in
filmmaking?
And what is that mission?
STANLEY NELSON: Well, I'm not --
hopefully,
I'm not on a mission.
But, you know -- so, I guess,
sometimes, I
am. I think there is this
continuity. The
film that we did right before
this, "Freedom
Summer," you know, it ends in
1964 with Stokely
Carmichael yelling, you know,
"Black power,
black power, black power."
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, leading
right to this
next one.
STANLEY NELSON: And this film
starts again
almost with the same clip of
Stokely yelling
"Black power, black power, black
power."
So, I think, sometimes, people
want to look
at the Black Panthers and the
Black Panther
movement as kind of outside the
civil rights
movement. I think that it was
part of the
civil rights movement. And I
think that whether
you agree with them or not, I
think that it's
time for a reassessment of the
Panthers, and
to look at them in a new light.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
film is "The
Black Panthers: Vanguard of the
Revolution."
Stanley Nelson, thanks so much.
STANLEY NELSON: Thank you so
much.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight, an
ode to desserts.
Daniel Boulud is a James Beard
Award-winning
chef with restaurants around the
world. Tonight,
he celebrates a meal's sweet
spot, dessert,
and explains why we should never
go without.
DANIEL BOULUD, Chef: A meal is a
crescendo.
And the crescendo wouldn't be
complete without
the dessert.
The last impression I think you
want to leave,
a long lingering, sort of,
dreamy feel of
the end of a meal. And I think
dessert, it
energizes you, the sugar. I
think you get
a little bit of the sugar rush.
WOMAN: The best part of it is
you soak it
in a lot of rum.
DANIEL BOULUD: That's Ghaya, our
pastry chef.
So, right now, we're doing a
baba au rhum.
It's an old classic dessert
where it's maybe
not a children-driven dessert,
but, you know,
once you start to grow up, you
love baba au
rhum because that's the only
chance you have
to have a little bit of alcohol
in your dessert.
And for us, we take this classic
idea of the
baba au rhum, but we make a
delicate baba,
which is soaked in an aged white
rum, 3-years-old
white rum with vanilla. And then
we have pistachio,
a crust of pistachio on top.
And we serve that with a
pistachio whip cream,
and the crunch of the little
pistachio, and
then on the side, also, is a
salad of citrus,
so there's grapefruit, there is
orange, there
is a little bit of kumquat
confit in sugar
and all that.
So the citrus is there to sort
of play with
the rum, play with the baba,
cool off a little
bit the rum. The cream is there
to give richness
to either the baba or the
citrus. And the
sweet together, it's still a
very light, refreshing
dessert, and yet a very classic
French baba
au rhum.
Dessert is very artistic.
Dessert is sort
of an expression of art in a
very natural
way and in a very sort of
decadent way as
well. In cooking, yes, it's a
little bit more
like jazz, I mean, where you can
jam a little
bit. You can take -- you can be
spontaneous.
With pastry, it, I think, goes a
little bit
more like classical music. The
repertoire
is set, and it's a question of
just creating
the layers of intensity. The
texture, we respect
the taste. I don't think dessert
is really
the problem in a diet of people.
You have to eat dessert with
moderation, but
I think it's important to
continue to keep
yourself and your soul happy
with a bit of
sweetness. And I'm having
chocolate every
night at home. I have always bar
of chocolate.
And I break a little piece, and
I suck on
slowly and feel like, ah that's
so good. OK,
that chocolate, maybe we should
do something
with it tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: Online, 30 years
after her death,
author Ayn Rand continues to
influence a new
generation of readers inspired
by the philosopher's
praise of individualism.
But what would her vision of the
world look
like now? Making Sense columnist
and research
psychologist Denise Cummins
imagines a place
where self-interest reigns. Read
her take
on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose":
Secretary of Defense
Ash Carter on his plan to
energize the coalition
against ISIS.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday: telling stories
with music,
Carter Burwell on composing for
the movies.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.